=================================
 Week #2: The Power of Structure
=================================

What is structure?
------------------

Aristotle was an ancient Greek philosopher who wrote a book called "Poetics",
where he argued plot or *mythos* was the most important element of drama.
Aristotle is credited with inventing the three act structure:

**The beginning**
  This is where you set up your characters, their relationships, their wants
  and desires.
  
**The middle**
  This is where the plot reaches its climax. 

**The end**
  This is where the plot is resolved. 

Today, modern screenplay writers use a three act structure when putting
together scripts. The ancient Roman lyric poet Horace can be given credit for
devising the five act structure. In a poem called "Ars Poetica", Horace offers
advice on how to write poetry and drama. Specifically, he argued that a play
should not be longer or shorter than five acts.

About structure for novels and short stories, the five act structure, that
while owing credit to Aristotle and Horace, is a lot more modern. Emma Mott is
an American author who wrote a wonderful book on the craft of writing called
"Bird by Bird". In it, she describes a conversation that she had with the
novelist Alice Adams about a unique five act structure Alice uses called **A B
D C E**:

**A stands for Action**
  Action is what draws the reader in. It's something specific and concrete.
  Lots of stories open up with a character thinking about something or doing
  something passive. That's not an action, an action is something physical that
  involves a character doing something. 

**B is for Background**
  Background is essentially context, or what was happening to these characters
  before the story started. This is the part of the story where we get
  essential and vital information that will help us determine the character's
  actions as we go through the story. 

**D is for Development**
  This is where the meat of your story is. This is where the plot of your story
  happens because it's in this area where your characters deal with the rising
  actions you throw their way. And it's up to the characters to develop
  themselves and their responses in either succeeding or failing to overcome
  the obstacles in their path. 

**C stands for Climax**
  The climax is where the biggest rising action happens in your story. This is
  the place where the key narrative twist in your story happens. And because of
  that twist, things are different for your main characters in a real and
  significant way. 

**E is for your Ending**
  This is where we learn that the characters we thought we knew have become
  someone else because of their journey. 

Now each of these sections can be of any length, though endings are usually
short. Good stories are a circle or a spiral. They leave us back in the same
place but changed in some way. If you were to diagram this spiral, you'll see
that the tail end of the spiral goes out further than the spiral starting
point. This means your main character wanted something but didn't get it, or
they got it, but they were unexpected consequences. 

Example
~~~~~~~

Suppose you have a house cat, let's call your cat Bugens, a large orange and
white tabby. One day your partner decides to leave you because Bugens is
getting in the way of your relationship. This is your action. Remember, the
action thaat kicks off of your story is usually dramatic. 

Now you have Bugens because your kid brother, who was a soldier that died in a
war, gave him to you to take care of. This is your background. It's the context
that offers vivid and crucial information that helps us determine our main
character's action throughout the story. 

Now let's develop our story with Bugens. Bugens is indeed high maintenance. He
has a chronic sneezing condition that causes him to expel thick green strands
of snot on his food bowl, his water fountain, even on your face and in your
mouth, if he times his sneezing just right. He's also developed diabetes,
meaning he requires injections twice a day at exactly the same time. Meaning
you can't stay out with your boy or girlfriend beyond a certain time, because
you have to go back home and give Bugens his shots. 

You realize that your boy or girlfriend has a point about him being high
maintenance, but Bugens has been with you for years and has helped you through
many crises. And because of the promise you made to your dead brother, the war
veteran, getting rid of Bugens isn't an option. 

Now remember: the development is where you outline what your characters want
and what's standing in their way. 

Now it's time for the climax, this is the key narrative twist in your story.
This is where you bring all the threads of your story together. You invite your
boy, girlfriend back to your house and offer to cook a conciliatory dinner.
While you're in the kitchen, Bugens attacks your boy, girlfriend, who then
contracts rabies. You now have to make a decision. Lose your partner for good,
or get rid of Bugens. The ending, now this is what happens to your characters
after the climax. 

You decide to honor your commitment to your brother and keep Bugens. You never
see your boy or girlfriend again, but you and Bugens, after several trips to
the vet, live happily ever after. 

ABDCE structure examples from famous works of literature
--------------------------------------------------------

F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Action**
 Our main character, Nick Carraway, moves to Long Island, renting a house in
 the fictional village of West Egg and takes a job in New York City as a bond
 salesman.

**Background**
  Nick's cousin is Daisy who's married to a man named Tom Buchanan, a college
  acquaintance of Nick's. 

**Development**
  Nick meets the mysterious and enigmatic Jay Gatsby, who once had a romance
  with Daisy, and spends the summer in Gatsby's world. Daisy and Jay rekindle
  their romance and start an affair. Nick learns through a woman he's dating
  that Tom has a mistress named Myrtle Wilson. When Tom realizes Daisy is in
  love with Gatsby, Tom confronts Gatsby and reveals to Daisy that Gatsby made
  his fortune through bootlegging. Tom then sends Daisy and Gatsby back to West
  Egg. 

  Note how every line of summary here is literally another rising action.
  
**Climax**
  The key narrative twist in your story that brings all the threads together.
  Gatsby's car, driven in a reckless rage by Daisy, kills Tom's mistress.
  
**Ending**
  Now, what happens to your characters after the climax? Gatsby is murdered by
  Myrtle's husband, and Nick leaves Long Island in a complete state of
  disillusionment, and moves back to the Midwest. 

Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Action**
  Romeo is taken by his cousin Benvolio to a Capulet ball where he meets and
  instantly falls in love with Juliet. 

**Background**
  Romeo's family, the Montagues, and Juliet's family, the Capulets, are sworn
  enemies. 

**Development**
  Romeo and Juliet, after a whirlwind courtship, decide to get married.
  Juliet's cousin Tybalt, incensed that Romeo snuck into the Capulet party,
  challenges him to a duel. Romeo refuses to fight, so his friend Mercutio
  accepts the duel on Romeo's behalf. Tybalt kills Mercutio, so Romeo kills
  Tybalt and is exiled.
  
**Climax**
  Romeo returns from exile and sees Juliet in the tomb. Thinking she's dead, he
  kills himself. Juliet turns out not to be dead, only in a death-like coma due
  to a potion provided to her by a friar. When she awakens, she discovers Romeo
  is dead, then kills herself too.

**Ending**
  The friar that gave Juliet her potion tells the entire story to both the
  Montagues and the Capulets, who agree to at last end their grudge. 

Harry Potter & the Sorcerer's Stone
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Action**
  Harry Potter an orphan that's being mistreated by his horrible aunt and
  uncle, the Dursleys, learns just before his 11th birthday via a
  hand-delivered message from a half giant named Rubeus Hagrid that Harry is a
  wizard. 

**Background**
  We learn that a great and terrible wizard, Lord Voldemort, murdered Harry's
  parents, but vanished when he tried but failed to kill Harry Potter when he
  was an infant. Professor Dumbledore, Professor McGonagall, and Hagrid place
  Harry in the care of his Muggle uncle and aunt, Vernon and Petunia Dursley.
  
**Development**
  Now this is where a majority of the book takes place. Harry learns what it
  means to be a wizard and starts discovering the wizard world. He also begins
  to meet a few of his supporters, Hagrid, Ron, and Hermione, and antagonists,
  Snape, and Draco Malfoy. We follow Harry through his first year in school
  where he faces the standard problems of a new student, getting lost on the
  way to class, trying out for the quidditch team, noticing mysterious
  happenings going on around the school. 

  Ultimately, Harry, Ron, and Hermione reach an erroneous conclusion that Snape
  is trying to steal the Sorcerer's stone and attempt to stop him. 

**Climax**
  The climax comes when Harry reaches the end of the teacher's set traps and
  puzzles, and sees not Snape, but Professor Quirrell attempting to steal the
  stone by looking for it in the mirror of Erised. During the climax, Quirrell
  reveals that he had tried to kill Harry earlier in the year at a quidditch
  match, and that he'd released a troll into the school. Ultimately, Quirrell
  reveals that he's being possessed by Lord Voldemort, who forces Harry to look
  in the mirror and find the stone. Harry gets the stone but refuses to give it
  to Voldemort/Quirrell. When Voldemort tries to take the stone from Harry,
  Harry passes out. Harry wakes up later to find out Quirrell couldn't take the
  stone from him, likely because he's still under the protection of his
  mother's love, which saved him as a baby. Dumbledore reveals that Voldemort
  left Quirrell to die and that the stone has been destroyed. 

**Ending**
  The conclusion of the school year, Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Neville win back
  all the house points they lost earlier by sneaking out of their common room,
  and Gryffindor wins the house cup. Harry returns home to the Dursleys for the
  summer without letting them know he's not allowed to use magic outside of
  school. 



Visiting Writer: How Structure and Outlines Can Help Organize Your Plot and the Story You Want to Tell
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Interviewer: Brandon Skyhorse
* Interviewed: Douglas Martin

Questions
~~~~~~~~~

* **Many young writers don't outline because they don't see the point or don't
  know where the story is going until they get there. Is it ever a good idea to
  start writing in earnest without an outline? Can you benefit from doing an
  outline later in the writing process?**
  
  I think the most important thing is to begin writing, definitely. So if
  there's not an outline, that should not stop you from getting down. Sitting
  down at the desk. I think the outline is kind of there as a safety net for
  me, and to hold me a bit.
  
* **How does that process work for you?**
  
  I think about it as like it's kind of the next thread that I'm going to pick
  up the next day. So you're not staring at, like, blank space, the blank desk,
  the blank page, but like this particular point is going to be my launching
  pad, you know? Not necessarily the goal, but, like, the set off. Right?
  
  My first novel, ironically called Outline of My Lover. The outline is a
  formal and ironic conceit. And that was imposed later. It was after many
  months of doing what I call and think of as *blind writing*: the important
  thing for me was to write a certain number of pages or a certain number of
  hours everyday and not think about particularly where I was going. And the
  downfall of that, or the downside of that, if there is one, is that you end
  up throwing away half of your pages. So in going back over a manuscript that
  I think in pages, not word count particularly, but going back over a
  manuscript that was about 300 pages turned into a novel that was about 120.
  So a lot of redundancies, but I think if you don't allow yourself that space
  forward redundancy, you won't find the surprising stuff.
  
* **Let's say you have a writer that's never written an outline before. What
  guidelines can you offer them to get them started?**
 
  I think it's not a bad idea to look at people that you yourself are impressed
  by. Work that has particularly moved you and to outline those stories
  themselves and then try to use that as a blueprint. And see where the
  analogous spaces in your own work might be.
  
* **Douglas is suggesting to take a story, or a narrative, or a book that is a
  favorite of yours and just outline it out and see where the beats are. J. K.
  Rowling broke her outlines down into little grid boxes chapter by chapter and
  Faulkner wrote broad ideas on the walls of his office. If you over outline,
  do you run the risk of shifting from a writer to a translator of your work?
  Is there such a thing as too much outlining slowing the creative process?**
 
  I think that I'm way more Faulkner than J. K. Rowling to begin with and we
  should all have the liberty, the leisure, and the space to be able to write
  on our walls. You don't want to back yourself into a corner. So for me like
  an outline is always kind of like a big kind of bullet point. And it's kind
  of like almost a title to a painting that you're meant to create. So, I can
  see the wall thing, I've done that myself. This is this particular moment in
  time. Then you can quite physically move in space.
  
* **Do you use different colored sheets or how would your wall look like?**
 
  Like different colored markers and definitely part of me outline or finding
  the form within my lined, writing manuscripts is color coding. For sure and
  so then it's pulling together all of the things that have been keyed to red
  for whatever reason. And then to begin to just arrange those elements. So
  having little particular boxes or walls or grids in the J. K. Rowling thing
  that you can work within. But not being so tied to the road within there, the
  A to the B, but rather allowing yourself to move the pieces back and forth of
  each other. I mean, it's really hard for me to think about writing without
  the particular medium that it happens in. And now thinking about writing on a
  computer. I think when you cut and paste and move this paragraph below this
  one or above that one around, you're doing a sense of active outlining. And
  so that's a kind of thing that I do, you know on my feet a kind of active
  outlining. There's a lot of numbering of files that tends to happen. A
  particular Word document that becomes two or one orders and have the
  experience of that.
  
* **In the process of outlining, where have you made your most exciting
  discoveries?**

  When a particular bullet point has ceased to land, and I've gone into, I'm
  going to go be on this thing and knowing that I'm meant to be on that thing
  and I can't quite it's the liberty to be at the side of the thing that's
  holding me. That's, you know Doctora has that thing about writing a novel's
  like driving on a dark highway with only the headlights in front of you. I
  think that's a fine thing, but what if you actually don't want to be in the
  car, be on the road. So the outlines are kind of not like the seat belt
  necessarily, but like is it a way to make sure that you get your destination
  in a more expedient way. Like you perhaps drive during the day as supposed to
  night or like.  It's a map too and you can't be afraid to actually fly off or
  tunnel down. Right, and I think that's when the online goes wrong when it
  becomes a very efficient profundity A to B to C. And you have to allow for
  the footnotes. You have to allow for the subtitles to be outlined. The side
  outline.
  
  Basically giving a structure, but at the same time also allowing for a
  certain degree of fluidity, as well.

Assignment: What's up, Doc?
---------------------------

Write a very short story -not more than 200 words- about a trip to the doctor
or dentist using the ABDCE structure. Identify the structural elements in your
story. My example is in the assignment introduction video, and reproduced
below:

*One night when I was eight years old I opened a bag of Doritos to eat while*
*watching television. (A) Doritos were my favorite snack to eat as a child.*
*Nacho Cheese was my favorite flavor. (B) I loved sitting in the dark*
*hearing the "crunch, crunch, crunch" of the chips. I’d sit there, crunching*
*my chips, but didn’t eat the chips with a napkin (what kid does?) and would*
*forget about the powder that accumulated on my fingertips. As it got later*
*and I got sleepier, I kept rubbing my eyes, my fingertips covered in*
*Doritos Nacho Cheese powder. (D) When it was time for bed, I went to brush*
*my teeth, looked in the mirror, and saw two large bags under my eyes. The*
*Doritos Nacho Cheese powder had pooled into two large sacks underneath my*
*eyeballs. I started screaming and crying. (C) The next day, my grandmother*
*took me to the doctor who put industrial strength eye drops into my eyes to*
*flush out the powder. (E)*

Remember, the action in this story isn’t the actual doctor’s office visit. The
action is what LEADS you to the doctor’s office.
