=====================
 Week #4: Cut it out
=====================

Editing and revision
--------------------

Welcome to module D, cut it out. In this module we're going to talk about editing and revision. You've finished a first draft of your manuscript. Congratulations! Celebrate with a nice dinner, then wait one week. Now it's time to revise your work. 
0:37
Editing and revision can help you see your plot a different way so you discover what your story is about. 
0:44
The process of revision starts with the first draft, which will now become your second draft, and continues until the manuscript's ready to send to an agent. 
0:54
This revision process can take weeks, months, sometimes even years. Be patient with yourself throughout this process. You only get one shot at introducing your work to an agent. Don't rush through the revision because you're eager to sell your book. 
1:11
Most books don't sell because they weren't ready to be shown to others. Don't let that happen to you. 
1:19
So how do you begin to revise? Well, I've created a 21 point checklist on exactly what to do once you have a complete first draft. Number one, start with easy fixes, typos, cutting adverbs, etc. This is called running your spell check. Running spell check is not what revision is. Spell check is only the first step in your 21 step revision process, so don't confuse the two. Number two, omit needless words. Look at your sentences. Is every single word necessary? The word single wasn't needed in that last sentence. Look for any opportunity to cut out words you don't need. Number three, cut places where you're doing the reader's thinking for them. This falls under telling and not showing. If a reader needs to understand a particular point they should be shown it in the scene so they can draw there own conclusions. If you need to tell them something, write it again, and again, until you've shown them instead. Number 4, cut stage direction, belaboring the obvious, clumsy back story etc. Stage direction are lines that focus on where a character's standing or how many physical movements they need to take to get to the kitchen. Don't walk me through every single step a character takes. Get me inside their head. Number five, insure consistent character motivation. If a character does something that's out of character, it should be because your character has evolved in your story, not because you forgot what that character acts like. Number six, has something happened? An action, a concrete action by the end of the first paragraph of your story. Number seven, is my story coherent? Are my details both physical and emotional, consistent throughout my story? Number eight, are there scenes? Are they clear? Are they complete scenes? Did I hit all five points on my scene checklist? Am I showing and not telling in these scenes? Number nine, do I start each chapter in each scene with something active? Number ten, am I writing in active voice? Have I avoided passive voice and parallel construction, using the same words over and over? Check out Strunk and White's Elements of Style for a more detailed description of passive voice, but if you're using any of the following phrases, there is, there are, it is, made his way, you're probably writing in passive voice. Number 11, is setting working? Setting should be an integral part of your story and contribute to our understanding of it. If it isn't, then your story could be set anywhere and that's not an effective way to tell a story. 
4:05
Number 12, are my characters acting believably? Do they each want something? Do each of my characters have believable flaws? Your characters need to do things that a reader believes they are both physically and emotionally capable of doing. They should also be flawed, because flawed characters usually desire something. Perfect characters don't want anything because they have everything they need already. 
4:31
Number 13, are the transitions between my paragraphs and sections clear? Sloppy transitions kick the reader out of your story by reminding us where the scenes in your story are. Number 14, does my story fit together the right way? Does it follow the five act structure? Action, background, development, conflict and end. If your story doesn't have the right structure, your story won't make sense to a reader. 
4:57
Number 15, did I explain to the reader every risk involved for each of my characters? Characters that don't risk anything stay at home on the couch. Characters that take risks give us a story. 
5:11
Number 16, did I explain to the reader the consequences of these risks? The better we understand what a character risks, the better we can empathize with that character, and want to follow them along. 
5:23
Number 17, does every story of my sentence deepen our understanding of character or advance the plot? Every sentence of your novel has to do this. Any sentence that fails this simple test, should be cut. 
5:38
Number 18, is my second draft 10% shorter than my first draft? 
5:44
Number 19, am I ready to discard pages or entire drafts that are simply not working instead of trying to find endless ways to jerry rig them? Just because you worked on something for a year, or five years, or 15 years, doesn't mean it's good. I say this as someone who worked off and on on my second book for close to 18 years. Don't hold onto something and patch it together with duct tape just because you've been working on it a long time. If you aren't doing significant revisions each year you're working on your book, it's not getting better. If it's not getting better, it's time to toss those pages away. 
6:23
Number 20, in Stephen King's craft book On Writing, when he revises he says I'm looking for what I meant. Is what you meant in your head as clear as it can be on the page? When you're writing you have a picture in your head that you're trying to capture. Have you translated that picture in your head onto the page? 
6:42
Now completing this checklist should take anywhere from several weeks to several months to complete. Stephen King mentioned in his nonfiction book On Writing that this process takes him at least three to four months of solid, steady, daily work. Now if you've been counting along, you've noticed there were only 20 points. What's the 21st point? Check back with me in the assignment four of this module, and I'll explain the all important 21st point and your writing assignment for this particular module. [MUSIC] 

Shop Talk with Amy Bloom: Defining Wants and Needs; Creating Characters with Strong Motivations and Desires
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hi, welcome to another segment on the craft of plot module. With me today is the incomparable Amy Bloom, author of a number of novels and collection of short stories. Amy, a pleasure to have you. >> It's nice to be here. >> So, let me start by asking you about character, because I know that your module deals with character. What is the best way that a writer can get to know his or her characters? >> Well, I think one of the hard things is when we say get to know in real life. It's as if there's somebody there to get to know. You meet somebody at the bus stop. You meet somebody at school. You meet somebody at work. You get to know them by talking to them and hanging out with them. 
0:56
When you're having an imaginary character, you have to create them so that you can hang out with them in your own mind. So you have to begin, I think often either with the external. You see somebody, they catch your eye, you begin to build your character from the little boy, an old man, a lady that you see on the street. But the other possibility is that you hear something, and for me that's usually how character begins. That's why I encourage my students to eavesdrop. Whether you're in school or work or on the street or in a cab or on a subway, listen to what people have to say because there might be something in a moment that catches your imagination. And then you begin to hear the voice. And you see the situation. And then you begin, in some sense, internally to design your character. And one of the things is, you need to be able to see them. They need to be whole. They need to be three dimensional. It's never enough to say movie star handsome because which movie star do you have in mind? Do you have in mind some great star of Bollywood from 1980, or do you have in mind George Clooney? Or do you have in mind a hobbit? What kind of movie star do you have in mind? >> Or all three. [LAUGH] >> Or all three. And that is going to be some character. >> Exactly, I'd love to see that movie. [LAUGH] >> So, you have to sort of say to yourself, how do I begin to imagine somebody? Sometimes one of the early exercises that you can do is think about people in your family and think about them at other points in time, imagining your own mother or father 30 years ago. What were they like as younger people. Imagining a younger brother or sister as an adult and just forcing your imagination, stretching your muscles to begin to imagine people who are not real. >> I think that's a really excellent point. Focusing on the external and in particular focusing on people from your own family using them as templates for characters that you would like to write about in your own fiction. One of the things I know that we've talked about is flaws. And I think that what happens in fiction is that people create such idealized versions of the live's that they want to live, that many of the characters, the protagonists that they are writing about, are so perfect. Do you feel flaws are important in describing a character and if so, why? >> I think flaws are necessary. I think everybody comes with them. It's not optional, it's not like you can get a human being without flaws as if you want a car without air-conditioning. It's like human being comes with flaws, that's how you recognize us. That's why we are not beautiful flowers. We are people. We make mistakes. Good people do bad things. It's also true that bad people do bad things, but that's actually not as interesting, that's a villain. That's for a comic book. That's for The Transformers. But, what's interesting is when good people who have fairly good intentions run into their own desires and their own wishes, and they are in conflict within themselves. The first conflict for a character that creates 
4:17
their visible flaw is the conflict within themselves. I want this and I want that. I want to be skinny, but I want a donut. I want to be a good person, but I'd like to be rich. It's not always easy to bring those things together. And that's when you give your character a situation in which they are filled with conflicting wishes, we get to see how their flaws rise to the surface. A bad temper doesn't make you a bad person. 
4:46
A wish to avoid conflict doesn't make you a bad person, but it may not make you a great ally. A desperate longing to be somewhere else, a lack of love for a partner these are not things that make bad people. But they are all human flaws. And what I would say is, I appreciate the impulse when we're first writing to make everybody look good because it's sort of the dream world. But fiction is not about a dream world. Fiction is about a real world that you create from your imagination. >> And I think that's a really excellent point to emphasize that a character can be flawed without necessarily being the villain. And thinking about all of the great characters that perhaps you can think about from Harry Potter on down. Those are characters that are flawed individuals and more interesting because of those flaws. One of the things I often talk about with my student's is the importance of revision. How do you think revision works in helping us understand a character better? I know that oftentimes when I'm working on a piece of fiction, a character will present itself to me in a very shadowy form. And I'll have to spend many, many months finding out the architecture of what a character wants, their desire, etc. What process do you go through in your revision process to help understand a character better? 
6:10
Well, I often feel that I am sort of the bumbling private detective. I am my own Pink Panther. I am trying to follow this character through the shadows, down the alleyways, into buildings I don't recognize, across terrain that I'm not familiar with to get more glimpses of who they are. And I think that revision, to me revision is the writer's best friend. It's your opportunity to make it better. Not to look back and go that didn't work, dear, I need to stop. But to say, there was one little glimmer in there, and that was a good idea. And now I have to fan that, and bring it to life, and make it a whole light. And that's what you do with the character. You see, I had that moment where I thought he reminded me of that guy that I had met who was the salesman. What about that? What about the salesman's marriage? What about the salesman's background? Is he from the north or the south? Is he successful or unsuccessful? Is he happy in his work, is he happy in his marriage? Does he have kids? Does he have an elderly mother? Does he visit her or does he not visit her? And then I'm off and running. And revision is the opportunity to polish that, to reset it, to recast it. You know, the first time you create Harry Potter, maybe he doesn't have the lightning bolt on his forehead and you think, that's what he needs. >> Right. >> He needs the lightning bolt because we need to understand his parents because they never really go away even though they're gone. 
7:54
>> And I think it's really, again, a really excellent point that Amy's making is that discovering what your character does or discovering who your character is, is really an interrogative process. The more questions that you ask about what your character wants and needs, the deeper you will understand that character and the better that character will act on the page. So, in the remaining time that we have left. Can you give me the best advice that anybody's given you, be it a writer, friend, reader about how to create a good, believable character? 
8:30
>> I wish somebody had given me good advice about it. >> [LAUGH]. >> I'm still hoping somebody will give me good advice about it. But what I find myself thinking now is that the two essential pieces for character are observation and empathy. Look around, look around all the time. If you are a writer, even if you are a writer at the very beginning of learning how to be a writer, you're an observer. 
8:55
You like to look. You are curious about people. You notice them wherever you are. So to use your skill of observation, to begin to pick people out of the world and focus in on them. And then the second thing is it's not enough to describe somebody. You actually have to try to be them. And that's really the hard part. Most of us have enough trouble being ourselves, without having to then also take on the task of being other people. But when you're a writer that's the job. It's not enough to be able to describe the character. You have to enter into their body, into their soul, and see the world as they see it. Not as we observe them seeing it, but how they actually see what is happening to them. What I always say is bad people don't think they're bad. 
9:47
And that's how you create character. You enter into them and see it as they see it. >> Observation and empathy, again, the two key components into creating a believable character. Amy Bloom thank you so much for spending this time to talk with me. >> My pleasure. >> Thank you. [MUSIC] 

Shop Talk with Salvatore Scibona: Language that Gets Rewritten vs Language that Gets Cut Out
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hi. Welcome to another Shop Talk. We're talking today with novelist Salvatore Scibona, who is the author of the national book award finalist, The End. He's going to talk to us today a little bit about language. Salvatore, I'm glad that you're here. >> Thank you. >> So let me start off with a piece of advice that I know that a lot of writers are given when they've been working on a piece for a certain period of time. 
0:42
Writers are often suggested that they read their work aloud to distinguish what's working and what should be cut. 
0:50
What are they listening for? >> That is such a good question, and I have to tell you that I do that over and over and over and over again because not in order to be scrupulous, but just in order to wake up. I just find it very difficult to notice the language if I'm not saying it, and there is something sort of, I think. Language comes from speech. So when it gets divorced from speech, I think I almost wonder whether the mind is made to process language as speech, and there's something sort of off about doing it outside of speech. Actually, there's some story, I want to say it's in Augustine's Confessions or something like that, right, where it was one of the earliest, it was sort of praising, maybe I'm making this up. But praising, I think it was Saint Ambrose, who was supposed to be so brilliant that he actually could read without talking. And because up to that time- >> It’s his story, I hope it's true. [LAUGH] >> Right? Someone should correct me about who actually. But in any case, the idea before relatively recently, 1,000, 1500 years ago, whatever, was that everybody, written words were made to be said aloud. That's why they existed. It’s just sort of as a script. So I find that there are lots of simple mistakes that people make that they don't pick up until they read things aloud. And then the other thing is if you read out loud your own work repeatedly, you find that you get really bored with certain passages. You find that you want to fast forward. And you find yourself wanting to fast forward, that's the key. You go I'm not interested in this anymore. This doesn't have any punch to it. And then you start to look for the places that can go. I think those are really excellent points again. So, just keeping in mind it sounds very straightforward but it's a simple truism that language does come from speech. The fact that you can talk these things out, looking for simple errors, looking for typos, but also looking for the places that are boring. Really key components in reading your work aloud. 
3:10
I was doing some research for this interview and I came across a Paris Review interview from a writer I'm assumed that you, whose work are you familiar with and enjoy like I do, Rick Moody. >> Mm-hm. >> And here's what he had to say. And I thought it was just such a delightful quote that I wanted to share this with everybody here. Rick Moody was asked, what is it about language that he feels is so important? And Moody said, language pleases, which I think is just such a wonderful, delightful way to describe, that, you basically, what we enjoy about language. And then later in the same interview, Moody said every writer, no matter who he or she is, uses language on some personal level, and believe that their language is genuine. What does he mean, and what is genuine about the language that you use, as a writer? >> Wow, I wonder what he means. >> [LAUGH] I'm parsing it through. >> No, but genuine is a really great word. In some way, the really great American story writer Grace Paley, who died only a few years ago used to say in jury's at the Fine Arts and Works Center in province town where I used to work people were in previous areas when she was still on the jury. She said that she would sometimes stop the reading and say, but is it true about the story. Is it true? And then you think of the thing that Hemingway said that all you have to do is write one true thing and then write one more true thing and one more true thing. That's a very simple word, but what does it mean in the context especially fiction say? People say that journalism is responsible to the facts and fiction is responsible to the truth. What exactly does true mean in that setting? I'm not sure except that I know it when I see it. There's some kind of, you like, you ever work on a sentence for a really long time or a passage for a long time, and you just feel that there's something that's not quite working about it. And then I often find that there's something that I don't want to admit. Whether that's in a nonfiction piece or in a fiction piece, there's a parallel thing in fiction. Like maybe I don't want a certain thing to be true of this character, and then I let it out. And there's something that seems genuine about that. There's something that, maybe genuineness is underneath. You could speak of a genuine observation, as something that was under the pressure of the reel. You know that the [CROSSTALK] reality in some way was pushing on it. And, something that was not under pressure from the reel it's plausible but it doesn't have that pop where you realize, that's so right people really are like that. >> I think that's again just a really wonderful observation. Thinking about an acknowledgment perhaps that you want to make about a character, which perhaps is an extension of what you felt or observed or thought. And once you acknowledge it, put it on the page, it just rings the way that is true and genuine and just makes your fiction such a richer and deeper, more rewarding experience. >> You know that makes me think that there was a moment in my novel, The End, when I had been working for a couple of months. Actually this is ridiculous, but I had been working for a couple of months on trying to get one character, effectively one character to go into a room where I knew something important was going to happen. It was just basically, in other terms it was a transition from one scene to another scene. And then I had this moment when Was as if the character looked up from the page and said I don't want to go in there. >> They do that though right?? >> Like that's not to me, and they do that yeah. And that was a moment of genuineness. Like that was a moment when I really realized I must acknowledge that the character has developed a level of reality or internal consistency that allowed her that kind of will, which in retrospect, it sounds like great, wow, isn't that wonderful. At the moment it was happening It was infuriating, because I built up all of this plot structure to get this person into this room, and then I realized I had to get rid of it. >> Characters will do that. Characters will do that. And I know that for you, you are taking the Coursera course. If you're looking for more information about character, any module on character pretty much has you covered. So, in the remaining time that we have left here, I want to talk a little bit about editing versus revising because I know that that's something that we're both doing modules on. How do you decide what language gets re-written versus language that just should be cut entirely? That I feel is one of the key challenges for any writer going through a work that perhaps they've had several outside readers give them different feedback, different advice, different input. How do you make that determination? >> Well personally I rewrite incessantly. I mean basically all I do is rewrite. I very rarely have things that are composed from the blank page. Most of the work that I'm doing is fitting paragraphs or sentences in between things that are already there. So it’s though a chapter could start off almost with half a page, and then it ends up being 40 pages long just by the process of rewriting. When things come out, it's usually under duress. [LAUGH] But that still, the duress is, I mean, is constant. I probably wrote, I think in my first book I wrote probably four full chapters for everyone that's in the book. I had to cut- >> That you never used. >> That I never used yeah. I mean they're still there. I wrote the information into the world and I knew it so that the thing could refer, the piece could refer to these things that were off stage as it were, but y I remember one very trusted reader that I had. She's the first person who read the first full draft of the whole book. She had written in the margin. She had had a lot of things to say about other pages, and then there were a few pages where it was getting kind of blank and I thought, everything's fine. She's really liking it as it is, and then I turn the page and she had written an arrow up, an arrow down and a line across the whole thing meaning this whole section and written, I'm not interested in any of this. >> [LAUGH] >> It was about this whole thing that happened in Wyoming and I'd had gone to Wyoming. I had worked for about nine months on this section of the book, and then I realized that if I wanted to I could close off here and I could close off here and join them. Sort of like cinching up pants, [LAUGH] like taking the waist in on a pair of pants or something. Just like that, and, that whole extra section could go and the book would probably be better. >> And usually that's when you know, if you're able to cut something and remove something and the work that you're working on, the novel, short story, it feels like it reads better, tighter. You probably made the right decision, cutting it. Salvador Shabona, thank you so much. >> Thanks, Brando. [MUSIC] 


